---
layout: post
title: 10 Black Metal Albums
date: 2025-01-29 15:33:00-0800
description: Resonant ripples of the second wave, here is a curated list of 10 extreme and experimental black metal albums I love. Yes, love.
tags:
  - music
categories: lists
---
Neglecting for now my love of doom, and death, and folk, and viking, and gothic, and arena, and the first wave(s), and the new wave, and various crossovers and  \*-cores, and especially post-metal, below is a list of 10 phenomenal albums in my formative subgenre: black metal. I work out to these and work out my emotions through them. They're distinct from a first wave of thrash-inspired bands (Mercyful Fate, Kreator, Celtic Frost) – exemplified by Sweden's Bathory, whose *Under the Sign of the Black Mark* (1987) cleaved something new from thrash, while *Blood Fire Death* (1988) rooted the emerging subgenre in norse myth. This has naturally led to pagan meditations on time and place, and an ambient habit. Darkthrone carried Bathory's torch back to Norway, where it burnt down Christian churches, making a controversy of things. My selfish musical narrative begins in 1994, when both I and this decidedly avant-garde tradition of black metal were conceived:
<br>
1. Emperor, *In the Nightside Eclipse* (1994) – With respect to Bathory, this evocative album bore the seeds that have since grown into the contemporary scene. One can hear in it the footfalls of the *jötnar*, wandering and sometimes sprinting across the frozen wastes. Emperor's oeuvre, especially follow-up *Anthems to the Welkin at Dusk* (1997), and band members Mortiis and Ihsahn's bodies of solo work, make for an incomparable milieu.<br>\[Favorite track: "I Am the Black Wizards;" also shoutout to "A Fine Day to Die" and its homage to Bathory\]<br>
2. Ulver, *Bergtatt* (1995) – The earliest *gesamtkunstwerk* in the genre. This album has a refined atmospheric sensibility, with powerful blasts, ethereal singing, acoustic interludes, and even a flute's zephyr. Here's to 30+ years of Ulver's lycanthropy, and as many more moons as nature allows.<br>\[Favorite track: "I Troldkog Faren Vild"\]<br>
3. Taake, *Nattestid Ser Porten Vid* (1999) – A closing note on Norway's pioneering 90s scene. It's relentless, still with liminal interludes, but Høst's vocals are more dynamic than his predecessors'. This take on the genre is also more rhythmic, foreshadowing a rapprochement with death metal. While their followup *Over Bjoergvin graater himmerik* (2002) is better developed, I include this album for its booming, cavernous soundscapes that hearken back to the underground.<br>\[Favorite track: "III"\]<br>
4. Agalloch, *The Mantle* (2001) – A masterpiece by Oregon's greatest band, and the subgenre's second total work of art. It was post-black metal before we knew it. Agalloch, named for عود (*oud*), that fragrant wood of the gods, imbued this album with the umbralight quality of pagan forestry. Words to describe it in English are lacking: *chiaroscuro*, *komorebi* (木漏れ日), *lichtung*.<br>\[Favorite track: "...And The Great Cold Death Of The Earth"\]<br>
5. Drudkh, *Autumn Aurora* (2004) – Uniting Ukrainian poetics with a wonderfully articulated naturalism, this beautiful album is at once numinous and totemic. I listened to it while driving down through Colorado, with stark views of lonely mountains; I hope to listen to it again while visiting [Pando](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pando_(tree)) in Autumn.<br>\[Favorite track: "\]<br>
6. Paysage d'hiver, *Paysage d'hiver* (2008) – Whereas early albums like Darkthrone's *Transilvanian Hunger* () were distorted by recording technology, this album distorts recording technology, even as it transports  Think William Basinski's *The Disintegration Loops* (2002-3), but rather than carrying the ephemeral traces of 9/11, Pay  <br>\[Favorite track: "Yekteniya VI: Upovanie"\]<br>
7. Batushka, *Литоургиiа (Litourgiya)* (2015) – How fitting that the first Orthodox black metal album resulted in a schism[^1] between its creator, a purist, and its vocalist / marketer, who has gone on to commercial success with his own band Patriarkh (ЪАТЮШКА rendered in English). Krzysztof "Derph" Drabikowski, the original force behind Batushka, composed and recorded the music, played all instruments save drums, wrote the lyrics, and painted the album artwork: an epiphany, if you ask me. Bart Krysiuk sang the vocals, and it is a profane kind of logic by which he then tried (in vain) to silence Drabikowski and take the band's name. In Derph's words: "God's hymns are more metal than any satanic black metal music out there." Amen.<br>\[Favorite track: "Yekteniya VI: Upovanie"\]<br>
8. <br>
9. Mephorash, *Shem Ha Mephorash* (2019) – Far and away the most aesthetically coherent and developed performance / artists on the list. I didn't understand what it meant for an album to be demanding until suffering (gladly) though *Shem Ha Mephorash*, a mystical experience of recurring motifs torn asunder. Again the Swedes take English to higher places.<br>\[Favorite track: "Sanguinem"\]<br>
10. Havukruunu, *Uinuos Syömein Sota* (2020) – The spirit of Scandinavian black metal flowed eastward, from Sweden's own Bathory to Finland, where Havukruunu's crowning achievement was made (although their prior album is also phenomenal). *Uinuos Syömein Sota* rings like a clear callback across the Gulf of Bothnia.<br>\[Favorite track: "Vähiin Päivät Käy"\]<br>
Honorable mentions:
- Mayhem, *De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas* (1994) – Vile. Dissonance incarnate with politics and lore to match. The closing title track's use of liturgical, choral elements was inspired, and the album takes "Satanic" to a dialectical place.
- 

[1]: Thanks to Buck, a fellow metal connoisseur, for this observation. I'd say it's closer in spirit to the [Raskol (Раскол)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schism_of_the_Russian_Church) than the East-West schism, appropriate to the album's use of Church Slavonic, although the Polish National Catholic Church (PNCC) has also been accused of schism for its independence.